BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA, 2023 (BNS)
Act No. 45 of 2023
[Replaces Indian Penal Code, 1860]
Effective from: 1st July 2024

=== CHAPTER I: PRELIMINARY ===

Section 1 - Short title, commencement and application
This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. It extends to the whole of India.

Section 2 - Definitions
(1) "Court" means a Judge who is empowered by law to act judicially alone.
(16) "Grievous hurt" means: loss of sight, loss of hearing, loss of a member or joint, destruction of any member or joint, permanent disfiguration of head or face, fracture or dislocation of a bone or tooth, any hurt which endangers life or causes the sufferer to be in severe bodily pain for twenty days.

=== CHAPTER V: OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE ===

Section 147 - Waging war against Government of India
Whoever wages war against the Government of India, or attempts to wage such war, or abets the waging of such war, shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 148 - Conspiracy to commit offences punishable by Section 147
Whoever within or without India conspires to commit any of the offences punishable by Section 147 shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

=== CHAPTER VI: OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC TRANQUILITY ===

Section 189 - Unlawful assembly
An assembly of five or more persons is designated an "unlawful assembly" if the common object of the persons composing that assembly is to overawe by criminal force, or show of criminal force, the Central or any State Government or Parliament or the Legislature of any State, or any public servant in the exercise of the lawful power of such public servant.

Section 190 - Being member of unlawful assembly
Whoever, being aware of facts which render any assembly an unlawful assembly, intentionally joins that assembly, or continues in it, is said to be a member of an unlawful assembly. Punishment: imprisonment up to 6 months, or fine, or both.

Section 191 - Rioting
Whenever force or violence is used by an unlawful assembly, or by any member thereof, in prosecution of the common object of such assembly, every member of such assembly is guilty of the offence of rioting. Punishment: imprisonment up to 2 years, or fine, or both.

=== CHAPTER VII: OFFENCES RELATING TO ARMY, NAVY AND AIR FORCE ===

Section 196 - Abetment of mutiny
Whoever abets the committing of mutiny by an officer, soldier, sailor or airman in the Army, Navy or Air Force of India shall, if mutiny be committed in consequence of that abetment, be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment up to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

=== CHAPTER X: OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS ===

Section 169 - Bribery at elections
Whoever gives a gratification to any person with the object of inducing him or any other person to exercise any electoral right or of rewarding any person for having exercised any such electoral right shall be punished with imprisonment up to 1 year, or with fine, or with both.

=== CHAPTER XI: OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE ===

Section 229 - False evidence
Whoever intentionally gives false evidence in any stage of a judicial proceeding, or fabricates false evidence for the purpose of being used in any stage of a judicial proceeding, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 230 - Giving false evidence
Whoever gives false evidence shall, if that false evidence was given by him in a judicial proceeding, be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

=== CHAPTER XII: OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN AND GOVERNMENT STAMPS ===

Section 246 - Counterfeiting coin
Whoever counterfeits, or knowingly performs any part of the process of counterfeiting any coin which is for the time being current in India shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

=== CHAPTER XIII: OFFENCES RELATING TO WEIGHTS AND MEASURES ===

Section 267 - Using false weight or measure
Whoever uses any false weight or false measure of length or capacity, or fraudulently uses any weight or any measure of length or capacity as a different weight or measure from what it is, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 1 year, or with fine, or with both.

=== CHAPTER XIV: OFFENCES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, CONVENIENCE, DECENCY AND MORALS ===

Section 270 - Adulteration of food or drink
Whoever adulterates any article of food or drink, so as to make such article noxious as food or drink, intending to sell such article or knowing it to be likely that the same will be sold, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 6 months, or with fine up to Rs. 5,000, or with both.

Section 285 - Negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible matter
Whoever does, with fire or any combustible matter, any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 6 months, or with fine up to Rs. 2,500, or with both.

=== CHAPTER XV: OFFENCES RELATING TO RELIGION ===

Section 298 - Uttering words with deliberate intent to wound religious feelings
Whoever, with the deliberate intention of wounding the religious feelings of any person, utters any word or makes any sound in the hearing of that person or makes any gesture in the sight of that person or places any object in the sight of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 1 year, or with fine, or with both.

=== CHAPTER XVI: OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY ===

Section 100 - Culpable homicide
Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable homicide.

Section 101 - Murder
Culpable homicide is murder if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or if it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused.
Punishment: Death or imprisonment for life, and fine.

Section 103 - Punishment for murder
Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. If murder is committed by a group of five or more persons on grounds of race, caste, community, sex, place of birth, language, personal belief or any other similar ground, each member of such group shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 105 - Culpable homicide not amounting to murder
Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment up to 10 years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 109 - Attempt to murder
Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge, and under such circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of murder, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 10 years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 115 - Voluntarily causing hurt
Whoever voluntarily causes hurt shall be punished with imprisonment up to 1 year, or with fine up to Rs. 10,000, or with both.

Section 116 - Voluntarily causing grievous hurt
Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt shall be punished with imprisonment up to 7 years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 117 - Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons
Whoever, except in the case provided for by Section 122, voluntarily causes grievous hurt by means of any instrument for shooting, stabbing or cutting, or any instrument which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, or by means of fire or any heated substance, or by means of any poison or any corrosive substance, or by means of any explosive substance, or by means of any substance which it is deleterious to the human body to inhale, to swallow, or to receive into the blood, or by means of any animal, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 10 years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 118 - Voluntarily causing hurt to extort property
Whoever voluntarily causes hurt for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer, or from any person interested in the sufferer, any property or valuable security, or of constraining the sufferer or any person interested in such sufferer to do anything which is illegal or which may facilitate the commission of an offence, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 10 years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 121 - Assault
Whoever makes any gesture, or any preparation intending or knowing it to be likely that such gesture or preparation will cause any person present to apprehend that he who makes that gesture or preparation is about to use criminal force to that person, is said to commit an assault. Punishment: imprisonment up to 3 months, or fine up to Rs. 1,000, or both.

Section 124 - Kidnapping
Kidnapping is of two kinds: kidnapping from India and kidnapping from lawful guardianship. Whoever takes or entices any minor under sixteen years of age if a male, or under eighteen years of age if a female, or any person of unsound mind, out of the keeping of the lawful guardian of such minor or person of unsound mind, without the consent of such guardian, is said to kidnap such minor or person from lawful guardianship.
Punishment: imprisonment up to 7 years, and fine.

Section 127 - Abduction
Whoever by force compels, or by any deceitful means induces, any person to go from any place, is said to abduct that person.

Section 130 - Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder
Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person in order that such person may be murdered or may be so disposed of as to be put in danger of being murdered, shall be punished with imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment up to 10 years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 140 - Rape
A man is said to commit "rape" if he penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of a woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person; or inserts, to any extent, any object or a part of the body, not being the penis, into the vagina, the urethra or anus of a woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person; or manipulates any part of the body of a woman so as to cause penetration into the vagina, urethra, anus or any part of body of such woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person; or applies his mouth to the vagina, anus, urethra of a woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person, under the circumstances falling under any of the following descriptions: against her will; without her consent; with her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her or any person in whom she is interested, in fear of death or of hurt.
Punishment: rigorous imprisonment not less than 10 years, may extend to imprisonment for life, and fine.

Section 143 - Punishment for rape
Whoever commits rape shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 144 - Punishment for rape in certain cases
Whoever commits rape on a woman under sixteen years of age shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, and shall also be liable to fine.

=== CHAPTER XVII: OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY ===

Section 303 - Theft
Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any moveable property out of the possession of any person without that person's consent, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to commit theft.
Punishment: imprisonment up to 3 years, or fine, or both.

Section 304 - Theft in dwelling house
Whoever commits theft in any building, tent or vessel, which building, tent or vessel is used as a human dwelling, or used for the custody of property, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 7 years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 308 - Extortion
Whoever intentionally puts any person in fear of any injury to that person, or to any other, and thereby dishonestly induces the person so put in fear to deliver to any person any property or valuable security, or anything signed or sealed which may be converted into a valuable security, commits "extortion".
Punishment: imprisonment up to 3 years, or fine, or both.

Section 309 - Putting person in fear of death or grievous hurt in order to commit extortion
Whoever commits extortion by putting any person in fear of death or of grievous hurt to that person or to any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 10 years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 310 - Robbery
In all robbery there is either theft or extortion. When theft is robbery: Theft is "robbery" if, in order to the committing of the theft, or in committing the theft, or in carrying away or attempting to carry away property obtained by the theft, the offender, for that end, voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint, or fear of instant death or of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint.
Punishment: rigorous imprisonment up to 10 years, and fine.

Section 311 - Robbery when armed or with attempt to cause death
If any person, at the time of committing robbery, uses any deadly weapon, or causes grievous hurt to any person, or attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, the imprisonment may extend to imprisonment for life.

Section 317 - Dacoity
When five or more persons conjointly commit or attempt to commit a robbery, or where the whole number of persons conjointly committing or attempting to commit a robbery, and persons present and aiding such commission or attempt, amount to five or more, every person so committing, attempting or aiding, is said to commit "dacoity".
Punishment: imprisonment for life, or rigorous imprisonment up to 10 years, and fine.

Section 318 - Cheating
Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person shall retain any property, or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to "cheat".
Punishment: imprisonment up to 3 years, or fine, or both.

Section 319 - Cheating by personation
A person is said to "cheat by personation" if he cheats by pretending to be some other person, or by knowingly substituting one person for another, or representing that he or any other person is a person other than he or such other person really is.
Punishment: imprisonment up to 5 years, or fine, or both.

Section 323 - Mischief
Whoever with intent to cause, or knowing that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or damage to the public or to any person, causes the destruction of any property, or any such change in any property or in the situation thereof as destroys or diminishes its value or utility, or affects it injuriously, commits "mischief".
Punishment: imprisonment up to 6 months, or fine, or both.

Section 329 - Criminal trespass
Whoever enters into or upon property in the possession of another with intent to commit an offence or to intimidate, insult or annoy any person in possession of such property, or having lawfully entered into or upon such property, unlawfully remains there with intent thereby to intimidate, insult or annoy any such person, or with intent to commit an offence, is said to commit "criminal trespass".
Punishment: imprisonment up to 3 months, or fine up to Rs. 2,500, or both.

=== CHAPTER XVIII: OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND PROPERTY MARKS ===

Section 336 - Forgery
Whoever makes any false document or false electronic record or part of a document or electronic record, with intent to cause damage or injury, to the public or to any person, or to support any claim or title, or to cause any person to part with property, or to enter into any express or implied contract, or with intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be committed, commits "forgery".
Punishment: imprisonment up to 2 years, or fine, or both.

Section 340 - Forgery of valuable security, will, etc.
Whoever forges a document which purports to be a valuable security or a will, or an authority to adopt a son, or which purports to give authority to any person to make or transfer any valuable security, or to receive the principal, interest or dividends thereon, or to receive or deliver any money, moveable property, or valuable security, or any document purporting to be an acquittance or receipt acknowledging the payment of money, or an acquittance or receipt for the delivery of any moveable property or valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment up to 10 years, and shall also be liable to fine.

=== CHAPTER XIX: CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT AND ANNOYANCE ===

Section 351 - Criminal intimidation
Whoever threatens another with any injury to his person, reputation or property, or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person is interested, with intent to cause alarm to that person, or to cause that person to do any act which he is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do any act which that person is legally entitled to do, as the means of avoiding the execution of such threat, commits "criminal intimidation".
Punishment: imprisonment up to 2 years, or fine, or both.

Section 352 - Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of peace
Whoever intentionally insults, and thereby gives provocation to any person, intending or knowing it to be likely that such provocation will cause him to break the public peace, or to commit any other offence, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 2 years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 356 - Defamation
Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person.
Punishment: imprisonment up to 2 years, or fine, or both.

=== CHAPTER XX: OFFENCES RELATING TO MARRIAGE ===

Section 82 - Bigamy
Whoever, having a husband or wife living, marries in any case in which such marriage is void by reason of its taking place during the life of such husband or wife, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 7 years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 84 - Cohabitation caused by a man deceitfully inducing a belief of lawful marriage
Every man who by deceit causes any woman who is not lawfully married to him to believe that she is lawfully married to him and to cohabit or have sexual intercourse with him in that belief, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 10 years, and shall also be liable to fine.

=== CHAPTER XXI: OFFENCES AFFECTING LIFE ===

Section 106 - Causing death by negligence
Whoever causes the death of any person by doing any rash or negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 5 years, and shall also be liable to fine.
If such act is done by a registered medical practitioner while performing a medical procedure, the punishment shall be imprisonment up to 2 years, and fine.

Section 125 - Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby outrage her modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 5 years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 126 - Sexual harassment
A man committing any of the following acts: physical contact and advances involving unwelcome and explicit sexual overtures; or a demand or request for sexual favours; or showing pornography against the will of a woman; or making sexually coloured remarks, shall be guilty of the offence of sexual harassment.
Punishment: imprisonment up to 3 years, or fine, or both.

=== RIGHTS OF ARRESTED PERSON UNDER BNS/BNSS ===

Right to know grounds of arrest: Every arrested person must be informed of the grounds of arrest immediately.
Right to bail: In bailable offences, the arrested person has the right to be released on bail.
Right to legal representation: Every arrested person has the right to consult and be defended by a legal practitioner of his choice.
Right to be produced before Magistrate: Every arrested person must be produced before the nearest Magistrate within 24 hours of arrest (excluding travel time).
Right against self-incrimination: No person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness against himself.
Right to medical examination: An arrested person can request a medical examination.
Right to inform family: The arrested person has the right to have a friend, relative or nominated person informed of the arrest.
